[dbt tutorial] update "Load dbt models" section (#15402)
dagster-io/dagster: docs/content/integrations/dbt/using-dbt-with-dagster/load-dbt-models.mdx

At this point, you should have a [fully-configured dbt project](/integrations/dbt/using-dbt-with-dagster/set-up-dbt-project) that's ready to work with Dagster.

In this section, you'll finally begin integrating dbt with Dagster! To do this, you'll:

> - [Install Dagster and the Dagster-dbt library](#step-1-install-dagster-and-the-dagster-dbt-library)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Install Dagster and the dagster-dbt library](#step-1-install-dagster-and-the-dagster-dbt-library)
```

- [Create a Dagster project that wraps your dbt project](#step-2-create-a-dagster-project-that-wraps-your-dbt-project)
- [Inspect your Dagster project in Dagster's UI](#step-3-inspect-your-dagster-project-in-dagsters-ui)
- [Build your dbt models in Dagster](#step-4-build-your-dbt-models-in-dagster)
- [Understand the Python code in your Dagster project](#step-5-understand-the-python-code-in-your-dagster-project)

---

> ## Step 1: Install Dagster and the Dagster-dbt library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 1: Install Dagster and the dagster-dbt library
```

```shell
pip install dagster dagster-webserver dagster-dbt
```

---

## Step 2: Create a Dagster project that wraps your dbt project

You can create a Dagster project that wraps your dbt project by using the `dagster-dbt` command line interface. Make sure you're in the directory where your `dbt_project.yaml` is. If you're continuing from the previous section, then you'll already be in this directory. Then, run:

```shell
dagster-dbt project scaffold --project-name jaffle_dagster
```

This creates a directory called `jaffle_dagster/` inside the current directory. The `jaffle_dagster/` directory contains a set of files that define a Dagster project.

In general, it's up to you where to put your Dagster project. It's most common to put your Dagster project at the root of your git repository. Therefore, in this case, because the `dbt_project.yml` was at the root of the `jaffle_shop` git repository, we created our Dagster project there.

> **Note**: The `dagster_dbt project scaffold` command creates the Dagster project in whatever directory you run it from. If that's a different directory from where your dbt_project.yaml lives, then you'll need to provide a value for the `--dbt-project-dir` option so that Dagster knows where to look for your dbt project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: The `dagster-dbt project scaffold` command creates the Dagster project in whatever directory you run it from. If that's a different directory from where your `dbt_project.yaml` lives, then you'll need to provide a value for the `--dbt-project-dir` option so that Dagster knows where to look for your dbt project.
```

`dagster_dbt` = typo?
Also added formatting to a file name

---

## Step 3: Inspect your Dagster project in Dagster's UI

Now that you have a Dagster project, you can run Dagster's UI to take a look at it.

1. Change directories to the Dagster project directory:

   ```shell
   cd jaffle_dagster/
   ```

2. To start Dagster's UI, run the following:

   ```shell
   DAGSTER_DBT_PARSE_PROJECT_ON_LOAD=1 dagster dev
   ```

   Which will result in output similar to:

   ```shell
   Serving dagster-webserver on http://127.0.0.1:3000 in process 70635
   ```

3. In your browser, navigate to <http://127.0.0.1:3000>. The page will display the assets:

   <Image
   alt="Asset graph in Dagster's UI, containing dbt models loaded as Dagster assets"
   src="/images/integrations/dbt/using-dbt-with-dagster/load-dbt-models/dbt-asset-graph.png"
   width={2300}
   height={1706}
   />

---

## Step 4: Build your dbt models in Dagster

You can do more than view your dbt models in Dagster – you can also run them. In Dagster, running a dbt model corresponds to _materializing_ an asset. Materializing an asset means running some computation to update its contents in persistent storage. In this tutorial, that persistent storage is our local DuckDB database.

> To build your dbt project, i.e. materialize your assets, click the **Materialize all** button near the top right corner of the page. This which will launch a run to materialize the assets. When finished, the **Materialized** and **Latest Run** attributes in the asset will be populated:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build your dbt project, i.e. materialize your assets, click the **Materialize all** button near the top right corner of the page. This will launch a run to materialize the assets. When finished, the **Materialized** and **Latest Run** attributes in the asset will be populated:
```

In this tutorial, we're going with the first option: When we ran `dagster dev`, we set the `DAGSTER_DBT_PARSE_PROJECT_ON_LOAD` environment variable.

Once you've got a path to a `manifest.json`, it's time to define your Dagster assets using it. The following code, also already in your project's `definitions.py`, does this:

```python file=integrations/dbt/tutorial/load_dbt_models/definitions.py startafter=start_dbt_assets endbefore=end_dbt_assets
@dbt_assets(manifest=dbt_manifest_path)
def jaffle_shop_dbt_assets(context: OpExecutionContext, dbt: DbtCliResource):
    yield from dbt.cli(["build"], context=context).stream()
```

This code might look a bit fancy, because it uses a decorator. Here's a breakdown of what's going on:

- It creates a variable named `jaffle_shop_dbt_assets` that holds an object that represents a set of Dagster assets.
- These Dagster assets reflect the dbt models described in the manifest file. The manifest file is passed in using the `manifest` argument.

> - The decorated function defines what should happen when you "materialize" one of these Dagster assets, e.g. by clicking the **Materialize** button in the UI or materializing it automatically by putting it on a schedule. In this case, it will invoke the `dbt build` command on the selected assets. The `context` parameter that's provided along with `dbt build` carries the selection.

Reviewer: Does there need to be quotes around "materialize"?

Author: nope

At this point, you should have a [fully-configured dbt project](/integrations/dbt/using-dbt-with-dagster/set-up-dbt-project) that's ready to work with Dagster.

In this section, you'll finally begin integrating dbt with Dagster! To do this, you'll:

- [Install Dagster and the Dagster-dbt library](#step-0-install-dagster-and-the-dagster-dbt-library)
- [Create a Dagster project that wraps your dbt project](#step-1-create-a-dagster-project-that-wraps-your-dbt-project)
- [Inspect your Dagster project in Dagster's UI](#step-2-inspect-your-dagster-project-in-dagsters-ui)
- [Build your dbt project, aka materialize your assets](#step-3-build-your-dbt-project-aka-materialize-your-assets)
- [Review the Python code in your Dagster project](#step-4-review-the-python-code-in-your-dagster-project)

---

> ## Step 0: Install Dagster and the Dagster-dbt library

Reviewer: This should be step 1. I recognize it's a pain to update the other headings + links (at least right now), but I'm talking to Dish about infra improvements that would eliminate the need to do this in the future.

Author: Not so bad to change them!

```shell
pip install dagster dagster-webserver dagster-dbt
```

---

## Step 1: Create a Dagster project that wraps your dbt project

> You can create a Dagster project that wraps your dbt project by using the `dagster-dbt` command line interface. Make sure you're in the directory where your dbt_project.yaml is. If you're continuing from the previous section, then you'll already be in this directory. Then, run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can create a Dagster project that wraps your dbt project by using the `dagster-dbt` command line interface. Make sure you're in the directory where your `dbt_project.yaml` is. If you're continuing from the previous section, then you'll already be in this directory. Then, run:
```

```shell
dagster-dbt project scaffold --project-name jaffle_dagster
```

> This creates a directory called `jaffle_dagster/` inside the current directory. The `jaffle_dagster/` directory contains a set of files that define a Dagster project.

Reviewer: Should `a set of files that define a Dagster project` link to the project files guide?: `/getting-started/project-file-reference`

Author: Oh this is a good idea but annoyingly the project files in our dbt scaffold are a little different than the files in our default project. I added a reminder to add this link when we make them the same: https://github.com/dagster-io/dagster/issues/15112#issuecomment-1649068100.

> In general, it's up to you where to put your Dagster project. It's most common to put your Dagster project at the root of your git repository. So in this case, because the dbt_project.yml was at the root of the jaffle_shop git repository, we created our Dagster project there. `dagster_dbt project scaffold` creates the Dagster project in whatever directory you run it from. If that's a different directory from where your dbt_project.yaml lives, then you'll need to provide a value for the `--dbt-project-dir` option so that Dagster knows where to look for your dbt project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, it's up to you where to put your Dagster project. It's most common to put your Dagster project at the root of your git repository. In this case, because the `dbt_project.yml` was at the root of the `jaffle_shop` git repository, the Dagster project was created there. 

**Note**: The `dagster_dbt project scaffold` command creates the Dagster project in whatever directory you run it from. If that's a different directory from where your `dbt_project.yaml` lives, then you'll need to provide a value for the `--dbt-project-dir` option so that Dagster knows where to look for your dbt project.
```

Adding formatting for the file names, and suggesting we break this up to be less visually dense.

Also, what would you think about adding `**Note**:` to the beginning of the second paragraph? I think it brings more attention to what this is saying, versus it being lumped in with the first part of the explanation.

Author: > the Dagster project was created there. 

This is actually a choice that the user gets to make, rather than a decision the software automatically makes for them, so I think first person makes more sense. Let me know if you disagree.

Making the other edits recommended here.

---

## Step 2: Inspect your Dagster project in Dagster's UI

Now that you have a Dagster project, you can run Dagster's UI to take a look at it.

1. Change directories to the Dagster project directory:

    ```shell
    cd jaffle_dagster/
    ```

2. To start Dagster's UI, run the following:

   ```shell
   DAGSTER_DBT_PARSE_PROJECT_ON_LOAD=1 dagster dev
   ```

   Which will result in output similar to:

   ```shell
   Serving dagster-webserver on http://127.0.0.1:3000 in process 70635
   ```

3. In your browser, navigate to <http://127.0.0.1:3000>. The page will display the assets:

   <Image
   alt="Asset graph in Dagster's UI, containing dbt models loaded as Dagster assets"
   src="/images/integrations/dbt/using-dbt-with-dagster/load-dbt-models-dbt-asset-graph.png"
   width={1090}
   height={894}
   />

---

> ## Step 3: Build your dbt project, aka materialize your assets

Reviewer: `aka materialize your assets` in the heading strikes me as odd.

Some alternatives:
- `Build your dbt models in Dagster`
- `Run your dbt models in Dagster`
- `Build and materialize dbt models` (ew)
- `Materialize your dbt models as Dagster assets`

Or something along those lines. Ideas? To be clear, my issue is with the `aka` part of the title, not what it's trying to convey.

Author: Hah I had a suspicion you weren't going to let me get away with this one. Your first suggestion sounds good.

You can do more than view your dbt models in Dagster – you can also run them. In Dagster, running a dbt model corresponds to _materializing_ an asset. Materializing an asset means running some computation to update its contents in persistent storage. In this tutorial, that persistent storage is our local DuckDB database.

To build your dbt project, i.e. materialize your assets, click the **Materialize all** button near the top right corner of the page. This which will launch a run to materialize the assets. When finished, the **Materialized** and **Latest Run** attributes in the asset will be populated:

> <Image

Reviewer: D'you know if this image is now on par with what users will see for dbt models as assets? I don't want to put you on the hook since it's not directly your change, but it's worth updating if this is way out of date or there's cool new stuff.

Author: Yeah definitely not on par. I updated the image.

alt="Asset graph in Dagster's UI, showing materialized assets"
src="/images/integrations/dbt/using-dbt-with-dagster/upstream-assets-asset-graph-materialized.png"
width={1091}
height={896}
/>

After the run completes, you can:

- Click the **asset** to open a sidebar containing info about the asset, including its last materialization stats and a link to view the [**Asset details** page](/concepts/dagit/dagit#asset-details)
- Click the ID of the **Latest Run** - in the above image, that's `651489a2` - in an asset to view the [**Run details**](/concepts/dagit/dagit#run-details) page. This page contains detailed info about the run, including timing information, errors, and logs.

---

> ## Step 4: Review the Python code in your Dagster project

Reviewer: Is this the best name for this section? Sure we're reviewing code here, but what's the thing we want to achieve by the end of this part? I think going with something along those lines could be an improvement

Author: Do you think "Understand" would be better than "Review"?

You saw how you can create a Dagster project that loads a dbt project. How does this work? Understanding how Dagster loads a dbt project will give you a foundation for customizing how Dagster runs your dbt project, as well as for connecting it to other data assets outside of dbt.

The most important file is the Python file that contains the set of definitions for Dagster to load: `jaffle_shop/definitions.py`. Dagster executes the code in this file to find out what assets it should be aware of, as well as details about those assets. For example, when you ran `dagster dev` in the previous step, Dagster executed the code in this file to determine what assets to display in the UI.

> In order to return a Dagster asset for each dbt model, the code in this file needs to find out what dbt models you have. It finds that out by reading a file called a "manifest.json", which is a file that dbt can generate for any dbt project and contains information about every model, seed, snapshot, test, etc. in the project. Here's the code that does this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To return a Dagster asset for each dbt model, the code in this file needs to know what dbt models you have. This is accomplished by reading a file called a `manifest.json`, which is a file that dbt can generate for any dbt project and contains information about every model, seed, snapshot, test, etc. in the project. Here's the code that does this:
```

Suggesting some small tweaks to make this more concise.

Is the code that follows what's in the user's `definitions.py` already? If so, I think explicitly stating that (over `Here's the code that does this`) would be helpful. Ex: 

> The following code, already in your project's `definitions.py`, [does a thing]

```python
dbt_project_dir = Path(__file__).parent.joinpath("..", "..")
dbt = DbtCliResource(project_dir=os.fspath(dbt_project_dir))

# If DAGSTER_DBT_PARSE_PROJECT_ON_LOAD is set, a manifest will be created at runtime.
# Otherwise, we expect a manifest to be present in the project's target directory.
if os.getenv("DAGSTER_DBT_PARSE_PROJECT_ON_LOAD"):
    dbt_parse_invocation = dbt.cli(["parse"], manifest={}).wait()
    dbt_manifest_path = dbt_parse_invocation.target_path.joinpath("manifest.json")
else:
    dbt_manifest_path = dbt_project_dir.joinpath("target", "manifest.json")
```

> As the comment explains, the code gives you a choice about how to create this manifest.json file. Based on an environment variable, either:
> 1. This code generates the manifest.json for you.
> 2. This code leaves it up to you to generate the manifest.json file on your own, and this code just reads it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the comment explains, the code gives you a choice about how to create this `manifest.json file`. Based on an environment variable, either:

1. This code generates the `manifest.json` for you.
2. This code leaves it up to you to generate the `manifest.json` file on your own, and this code reads it.
```

Adding formatting for `manifest.json` and a line break for readability.

Should we call out the environment variable specifically here? Ex:

> Based on the `DAGSTER_DBT_PARSE_PROJECT_ON_LOAD` environment variable, either:

> The first option is the easiest during development, because you never need to worry about the file being out-of-date with your dbt project. But generating the file can be time-consuming when you have a large dbt project, so it's generally recommended to go with the second option when you're deploying your dbt project to production. The second option allows you to only generate it once every time you deploy, rather than every time the code in this module gets executed.

Reviewer: What would you think of folding this information into the appropriate list item for each option instead of having another big paragraph here? Ex:

> 1. **This code generates the `manifest.json` for you.** This is the easiest option during development, because you never need to worry about the file being out-of-date with your dbt project. However, this can be time-consuming with a large dbt project and isn't recommended for production.
> 2. **This code leaves it up to you to generate the `manifest.json` file on your own, and this code reads it.** This option, recommended for deploying to production, allows you to generate the `manifest.json` once every time you deploy instead of every time the code in this module is executed.
>
> In this tutorial, we're using the first option. When we ran `dagster dev`, we set the `DAGSTER_DBT_PARSE_PROJECT_ON_LOAD` environment variable.

Author: I like it.

In this tutorial, we're doing with the first option: When we ran `dagster dev`, we set the DAGSTER_DBT_PARSE_PROJECT_ON_LOAD environment variable.

> Once we've got a path to a manifest.json, it's time to define our Dagster assets using it. Here's the code that does that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you've got a path to a `manifest.json`, you can define your Dagster assets using it. For example:
```

Suggesting using `you` instead of `we` here. This reads as more instructive than explanatory to me, so IMO using `you` is a better fit. This would also make the usage consistent with the rest of the tutorial.

Also suggesting an alternative for `Here's the code that does that:` - it feels nitpicky on my part, but it reads as a bit too casual for me. Thoughts?

```python file=integrations/dbt/tutorial/load_dbt_models/definitions.py startafter=start_dbt_assets endbefore=end_dbt_assets
dbt_project_dir = Path(
    "/Users/sryza/example-dagster/explore/dagster-dbt-project-scaffold/jaffle_shop"
)
dbt_manifest_path = dbt_project_dir.joinpath("target", "manifest.json")

@dbt_assets(manifest=dbt_manifest_path)
def jaffle_shop_dbt_assets(context: OpExecutionContext, dbt: DbtCli):
    yield from dbt.cli(["build"], context=context).stream()
```

This code might look a bit fancy, because it uses a decorator. Here's a breakdown of what's going on:

- It creates a variable named `jaffle_shop_dbt_assets` that holds an object that represents a set of Dagster assets.
- These Dagster assets reflect the dbt models described in the manifest file. The manifest file is passed in using the `manifest` argument.

> - The decorated function defines what should happen when you "materialize" one of these Dagster assets, e.g. by clicking the "Materialize" button in the UI or materializing it automatically by putting it on a schedule. In this case, it will invoke the `dbt build` command on the selected assets. The `context` parameter that's provided along with `dbt build` carries the selection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The decorated function defines what should happen when you "materialize" one of these Dagster assets, e.g. by clicking the **Materialize** button in the UI or materializing it automatically by putting it on a schedule. In this case, it will invoke the `dbt build` command on the selected assets. The `context` parameter that's provided along with `dbt build` carries the selection.
```

Bolding **Materialize** as UI elements are formatted using bold

If you later want to customize how your dbt models are translated into Dagster assets, you'll do so by editing this file.

---

## What's next?

> At this point, you've loaded your dbt models into Dagster as assets, and viewed them in Dagster's asset graph UI, and materialized them. Next, you'll learn how to [add upstream Dagster assets](/integrations/dbt/using-dbt-with-dagster/upstream-assets).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, you've loaded your dbt models into Dagster as assets, viewed them in Dagster's asset graph UI, and materialized them. Next, you'll learn how to [add upstream Dagster assets](/integrations/dbt/using-dbt-with-dagster/upstream-assets).
```

Just removing an extra `and`
